h2. MapStories and Moving from Visualization to Decision

!(thoughts)/static/img/rt.jpg!

  The great thing is to get the true picture, whatever it is.
  -- Winston Churchill

Visualization is much more than a by-product of optical nerve activity; it is the __sine qua non__ of imagination, foresight, creative thought, pattern matching, intuition, diagnostics, simulation, analysis, and cognitive processes central to intelligence analysis.  Cognitively, the visual pathway associated with the cerebral and visual cortices is the seat of mental prowess, the brain’s high bandwidth process for integrating all sources of sensory information, memory, and imagination.  Since the days of Ptolemy, moreover, the synergistic effects of spatial awareness and visual thinking have formed the core of the ‘mind’s eye’ for correlating disparate pieces of information to simulate present and future realities.  It is the combination of both that gives rise to predictive analysis – the ability to anticipate behavior and make proactive decisions.  This certainly explains why geospatial visualization, in particular, has long played a prominent role in national security decision-making, and is increasingly used in a wide variety of decision making domains.

But, visualizing data spatially only improves decision making when decision makers can understand how things change across both time and space. More importantly, the decision maker must be able to choose which variable – time or space – to keep constant while they explore how other variables – or aggregates of variables – changes. Sometimes one seeks to understand change over time in one location; in other cases one seeks to understand spatially represented data in one instance as other variables are added or changed.  In all cases, decision makers want to understand whether the complex phenomena they are grappling with are trending up or down, whether they are at a historic high or historic low, and similar ways of understanding change.  It is this change that is critical to understand.

Indeed, it is the unique human ability to contemplate and solve problems spatially and temporally that enables critical thinking, innovation, and anticipatory decision-making. Einstein exemplified this ability when he imagined himself in a box traveling by the earth at the speed of light, a visual journey that shattered existing concepts of physics and collapsed space and time inward.

Since the mid-fourteenth century, a shift has been underway in how we conceptualize space and time occurred in Western civilization.  In __The Measure of Reality__, Alfred Crosby summarizes this pre-Renaissance revolution as “a new way, more purely visual than the old, of perceiving time, space, and material environment” that “offered a new way to examine reality and an armature around which to organize perceptions of that reality.” A quest for new methods and techniques to exploit visualization evolved alongside this general turn toward visual experiences, leading to the drive for quantification within Western society and culture, a process that spurned Europe’s first mechanical clock, cannon technology, marine navigation, perspective in painting, and the drive for universal literacy.

Three highly interdependent areas of knowledge, each providing their own contributions to Western civilization, shaped what Crosby terms the “venerable model” of visualization and quantification that underwrote Western intellectual development during the Renaissance and then the Enlightenment.  First, a fundamental shift in temporal reasoning, beginning in the fourteenth century, led to new approaches to time keeping and a belief that humans could actually harness nature by re-defining its pace and scope.  Related to temporal reasoning was the drive for spatial awareness and spatial reasoning, which became central to all aspects of cognitive and social life in the modern world.  The re-invention of the map, and the invention of a modern cartographic method, stemmed from this drive, reflecting a turn away from allegorical to literal interpretations of the classics, the desire to document and record facts using new spatial reasoning concepts, and the need for a relational system to visualize historical and political knowledge.

By the seventeenth century, authors and readers alike demanded a system relating “time to place” in historical writings, a demand that carried itself through political, economic, and judicial sectors.  When, in the seventeenth century, the Dutch invented the science of optics, the social turn toward the eye received new momentum, including the ascendance of realism in art and mapping.  A third area of knowledge involved the creation of an entire system of thought.  Quantitative methods, scientific theorizing, and the discipline of objectivity blossomed as a visualization revolution facilitated notation, abstract reasoning, the shared perception of concepts, and standards for measurement.

It was during the Renaissance, David Harvey argues in __The Condition of Postmodernity__, that the Western mind “separated scientific and supposedly factual senses of time and space from the more fluid conceptions that might arise experientially.”  “Objectivity in spatial representation,” he continues, “became a valued attribute.”  In other words, the “Renaissance revolution in concepts of space and time laid the conceptual foundations in many respects of the Enlightenment project” that shaped Western intellectual life for the following five centuries.

The spatial-temporal aspects of the visualization revolution conjoined within the Renaissance and spawned, among others, new rules of perspective in art and, in intellectual life, the new science of objectivity from which the pursuit of secular knowledge proceeded. The cornerstone of this visualization revolution in science was the integration of spatial thinking with new technology to measure time.

It was from this ideational and intellectual fountainhead that the dream of capturing information and knowledge about the earth, in all of its dimensions, as realistically and accurately as possible, was resurrected from the ruins of Athens and given primacy in the modern Western canon.  And it was from this fountainhead that the image of an intelligence apparatus to describe, know, and predict behavior in order to influence policy evolved first in European empires and latter in technocratic governmental organizations.

The most recent step in this continuing evolution occurred with the advent of the digital age and the ability to organize, aggregate, and analysis huge volumes of data with computers connected via the Internet. Realizing the potential of this step requires combining technology with our innate cognitive faculties, which function most effectively when data is organized spatially and temporally. The current revolutions in the digital age are fundamentally about the user experience, the interface, and immediate access to online content that can be visualized in tailored, on demand representations of data. Two obvious impediments to fully realizing this revolution are 1) accessing and retrieving the most relevant data and 2) portraying that data spatially and temporally on demand for users seeking information to make decisions and to take action.

The message for those seeking to integrate and improve decision making based on new insights into the role of cognitive visual and spatial faculties is straightforward: as a species we are spatially oriented problem solvers who generally rely on visual cognitive capabilities to make sense of the world and to integrate sensory input and memory into decision making; and we only succeed when we simultaneously understand change over time and how different courses of action will unfold.  And, as social creatures, we are only able to truly harness this visual knowledge by telling stories that our colleagues can learn from, and collaborate on.  This has long been done by superimposing our narrative upon static paper maps, perhaps printed large for the entire team to rally around.  Even with the evolution to digital maps and geospatial information systems, maps have remained overwhelmingly static, leaving the actual storytelling largely untethered from the collaborative datastream.

The notion of MapStories and MapStorytelling represents a new evolution in this long history of problem solving by the human species.  We are now being empowered to do digitally what we as a species have attempted to do socially for so long.  We can now come together through digital crowd sourcing and describe our complex and ever-changing world spatially and temporally.  MapStory aspires to not only let us communally accumulate a well ordered, digitally encoded set of facts, but also to let us digitally express our experiences as spatio-temporally-enabled narratives (e.g., MapStories) that are digitally preserved, globally discoverable, communally editable, and subject to the same analytic scrutiny as the underlying facts.

The task ahead of us in overcoming many of our most vexing organizational challenges is to empower knowledgeable people to craft and publish MapStories, based on a vast well of adjudicated facts, as decision-relevant narratives.  Humans are storytellers. That is how we organize, share, and understand information. But, bringing together interdiscplinary knowledge into a common spatio-temporal framework that is both social and narrative is necessary if we are to harness our preternatural faculties for spatio-temporal reasoning and storytelling to improve the art of decision making in the advancement of global society.

MapStory.org is a step in this direction, seeking to leverage the power of crowdsourcing, online communities of interest, and millions of online users seeking to create content to demonstrate how data, information, and knowledge as stories can be organized spatially and temporally to improve our access to and understanding of global affairs. 

-- Dr. Robert Tomes, President, MapStory Foundation.

__Robert R. Tomes is Adjunct Professor of Security Policy Studies at The George Washington University and serves on the board of the Council for Emerging National Security Affairs (CENSA).__